.TH BOTTOM 1 "2026-07-11" "bottom 0.1.2" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
bottom \- record process lifecycle events
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bottom
[
.I options
]
.br
.B bottom
.I command
[
.I options
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bottom
is a read-only process lifecycle recorder. It records process starts, executable replacements, stops, restart churn, correlated service restarts, and detected capture gaps. Recordings can be queried, replayed, summarized, compared, and exported as a Perfetto timeline.
.PP
With no command, bottom behaves like
.BR "bottom record" .
.SH INTERACTIVE TIMELINE
On an interactive terminal, controls act immediately. Press
.B p
to pause,
.B k
or
.B j
to move through events,
.B d
for selected-event details,
.B c
to cycle command, context, and executable columns,
.B s
to cycle timeline, duration, PID, and command ordering,
.B x
to clear search, and
.B ?
for help.
.PP
Press slash to edit a search. Return applies it, Escape cancels it, Backspace deletes, and Ctrl-U clears the draft. The display adapts to terminal resizing. If raw terminal input is unavailable, the same controls are accepted as line commands followed by Return; use
.B columns
and
.B sort
for those cycles.
.PP
Ctrl-C or Ctrl-D stops bottom itself without acting on any monitored process.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B record
Record lifecycle events. This is the default command.
.TP
.B watch
Alias for
.BR record .
.TP
.B trace
Start one command directly and record it and its observed descendants. Options must precede an exact
.B --
separator.
.TP
.B query
Filter one or more JSONL recordings and render text, JSONL, or CSV.
.TP
.B replay
Replay one or more JSONL recordings with merged timing or through the terminal interface.
.TP
.B report
Summarize sessions, event kinds, gaps, failures, process groups, ancestry, and lifetimes across recordings.
.TP
.B compare
Compare process groups, ancestry, failures, counts, and lifetimes in two JSONL recordings.
.TP
.B version
Print version, source commit, and build date.
.TP
.B completion
Write fish completions to standard output. Save the output as
.IR ~/.config/fish/completions/bottom.fish .
.SH OPTIONS
Every option has a documented default and usage description. Run
.B bottom -h
for recording options or
.B bottom command -h
for command-specific options.
.PP
The
.B -input
option may be repeated up to 64 times for query, replay, and report. Events are merged by time, sequence, and input order. Without this option, those commands read
.IR bottom.jsonl .
.PP
The
.B -backend
option defaults to auto. Native choices are
.BR linux-proc-connector ,
.BR windows-etw ,
and
.BR macos-endpoint-security ;
.B poll
selects native process-table polling directly. Auto records a capture gap and falls back to polling when a platform event source is unavailable.
.PP
.SH RECORDING FORMATS
Text output is intended for terminals. JSONL and CSV contain versioned session, event, and gap records. JSONL is the canonical format for queries, replay, reports, and comparisons.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I bottom.jsonl
Default JSONL recording path for query, replay, and report.
.TP
.I bottom-trace.jsonl
Default trace recording path.
.TP
.I ~/.config/fish/completions/bottom.fish
Fish completion installation path.
.SH SECURITY
bottom observes processes but does not act on them. New recording files request owner-only access. Use repeated
.B -redact
options to replace exact sensitive values before recording.
.PP
The macOS Endpoint Security backend requires Apple's
.B com.apple.developer.endpoint-security.client
entitlement, an entitled signature, Full Disk Access, and the privilege required by the installed macOS release. Release archives include
.I docs/endpoint-security.md
and
.I packaging/macos/bottom.entitlements
with the signing procedure. Auto mode falls back to polling when those requirements are absent.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ps (1)
